Our licensing team is unable to accommodate walk-in customers. If you need assistance please contact the licensing specialist for your profession. Our contact information is at the bottom of this page. If we are unable to resolve matters by email, please feel free to request an appointment by phone with the licensing specialist for further assistance. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently not making in-person appointments.

New JBCC rules are now in effect. These rules are located on the rules and resources page of our website.

Effective September 1, 2018, the JBCC will no longer accept paper applications.  All applications must be submitted online using the JBCC Certification, Registration, & Licensing System.   Please note:  On September 1, 2018, the new fees for process server certification took effect.   

To search for Certified Process Servers, you must click on the red button below titled "Access the JBCC Certification, Registration Licensing System"
Guide to Using the Online System (pdf) 
Watch How to Apply for Renewal- Slideshow (pdf)
Watch How to Apply for Initial Certification- Slideshow (pdf)
Watch How to Apply for CE Approval Online-Slideshow (pdf)
Disciplinary Actions Log
JBCC Online Certification, Registration & Licensing System 
06/30/2020:

Applications cannot be submitted until 07/01/2020. Please do not submit applications prior to that date. 

ACCESS THE JBCC CERTIFICATION, REGISTRATION LICENSING SYSTEM

The Judicial Branch Certification Commission (JBCC) has a new online certification and licensing system. The new system allows users to:

apply and pay for new certifications, registrations, or licenses,
renew existing certifications, registrations, or licenses,
update contact information,
see a list of approved CE courses,
apply for CE course approval (licensees and providers)
check the status of applications,
confirm receipt of applications,
print payment receipts, and
search for individuals or entities that are certified, licensed, or registered with the JBCC.
If the information you seek cannot be found on our website, please refer to the Request for Records page of our website.
When submitting items associated with fees, you will be charged a transaction fee based on the amount of the fee that is due.  

Course Providers and licensees must have a user profile to use the online system, members of the public do not need a user profile. Current applicants, expired applicants wishing to become re-certified, and those currently certified and registered must use the activation code issued to them by the JBCC in order to create a profile. Activation codes will only be issued to the contact information currently on file. Activation codes will not be issued by phone. New (i.e., first-time) applicants can create a profile without an activation code.

TIPS FOR USING THE ONLINE CERTIFICATION, REGISTRATION & LICENSING SYSTEM
When creating your online account/profile, do not use the First Time Applicant process if you have already applied with us or are already certified, licensed, or registered with us. The First Time Applicant process is only for new applicants.
(Note: those who have already applied with us or are already certified, licensed, or registered with us must use the ‘Existing Certification’ process which requires an activation code. If you have not received your code from us, send an email to processservers@txcourts.govto receive your code. For security purposes, codes will not be provided by phone.)

Mobile and Apple devices may not be compatible for using our online system.
Naming Files to be Uploaded. Please ensure to name scanned files in a manner that clearly identifies the item being uploaded. For example, if uploading a fingerprint receipt, a good name would be “FP Receipt”, or “FP Receipt for Jane Doe”. A bad name would be “JBCC”, “123456789.jpg”. 
If you see incorrect information on your account/profile and you are unable to correct yourself, please send an email to processservers@txcourts.gov to request an update by staff.
If you need assistance using the online system and cannot find the guidance you need in the pdf Guide to Using the Online System, or the pdf renewal slide show, on our website, please send an email to the licensing specialist at processservers@txcourts.gov and they will assist you.
If we are unable to resolve matters by email, please feel free to request an appointment by phone with the licensing specialist for further assistance. 
