Question: Are small business concerns (as defined in section 3 of the Small Business 
Act, 15 U.S.C. 632) required to have 500 or fewer employees to be eligible borrowers for 
First Draw PPP Loans?3
Answer: No. Small business concerns can be eligible borrowers for First Draw PPP 
Loans even if they have more than 500 employees, as long as they satisfy the existing 
statutory and regulatory definition of a “small business concern” under section 3 of the 
Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 632. A business can qualify if it meets the SBA 
employee-based or revenue-based size standard corresponding to its primary industry. 
Go to www.sba.gov/size for the industry size standards. 
Additionally, a business can qualify for a First Draw PPP Loan as a small business 
concern if it met both tests in SBA’s “alternative size standard” as of March 27, 2020: (1)
maximum tangible net worth of the business is not more than $15 million; and (2) the 
average net income after Federal income taxes (excluding any carry-over losses) of the 
business for the two full fiscal years before the date of the application is not more than $5 
million.
A business that qualifies as a small business concern under section 3 of the Small 
Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 632, may truthfully attest to its eligibility for a First Draw PPP 
Loan on the Borrower Application Form, unless otherwise ineligible.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, housing cooperatives, eligible 501(c)(6) organizations, 
and eligible destination marketing organizations, are eligible for a First Draw PPP Loan 
only if they employ no more than 300 employees.
4
3. Question: Does my business have to qualify as a small business concern (as defined in 
section 3 of the Small Business Act, 15 U.S.C. 632) in order to receive a First Draw PPP
Loan?5
Answer: No. In addition to small business concerns, a business is eligible for a First 
Draw PPP Loan if the business has 500 or fewer employees or the business meets the 
SBA employee-based or revenue-based size standard for the industry in which it operates 
(if applicable). Similarly, First Draw PPP Loans are also available for qualifying tax-
exempt nonprofit organizations described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
Code (IRC), tax-exempt veterans organization described in section 501(c)(19) of the IRC, 
3 Question 2 published April 6, 2020 and revised March 3, 2021 to reflect the consolidated interim final rule 
implementing updates to the PPP. This FAQ applies only to First Draw PPP Loans. Different eligibility 
requirements apply to Second Draw PPP Loans. See FAQ #63 and subsection (c) of the interim final rule for 
Second Draw PPP Loans. 
4 See subsections B.1.g.v., B.1.g.vii., and B.1.g.viii. of the consolidated interim final rule implementing updates to 
the PPP for additional information on the eligibility of housing cooperatives, destination marketing organizations, 
and section 501(c)(6) organizations. 5 Question 3 published April 6, 2020 and revised March 3, 2021 to reflect the consolidated interim final rule 
implementing updates to the PPP. This FAQ applies only to First Draw PPP Loans. Different eligibility 
requirements apply to Second Draw PPP Loans. See FAQ #63 and subsection (c) of the interim final rule for 
Second Draw PPP Loans.
